During the first few years of the Galactic
Empire, Palpatine and his apprentice Darth
Vader were aboard a cruiser named the Defiance.
The ship had been used as a Flight Training
Institute for nearly its entire existence,
and was known for graduating some of the most
talented bridge navigation officers among
similar schools.
Emperor Palpatine was using the cruiser as
a meeting ground that he had planned among
his top Naval Chiefs to discuss how to best
re-organize the former Republic Academies
to better align with their plans for the galactic
wide Imperial Navy they were building, as
well as to have the Academies be more responsive
toward Palpatine whenever he wished to order
a change in the training programs.
While preparations for this meeting were being
made within the main offices of the Defiance
Cruiser, Darth Vader was ordered by his master
to oversee the training exercise that was
underway on the bridge among the newest cadets.
This training exercise was being advised by
a Commandant named Pell Baylo.
He was an old man in his 70s who had been
training cadets on the Defiance for nearly
5 decades, and had taken great satisfaction
in his ship’s reputation and his school.
Hours went by as Vader just stood there looking
at the cadets and their instructor going over
standard procedure that was expected on the
bridge of a ship.
Vader began to wonder why his master had asked
him to oversee such a tedious exercise, surely
he was far more useful doing something else.
The only subtle thing he noticed that was
of some interest to him was that the instructor
was clearly in physical pain due to a back
injury he likely sustained in some prior battle,
yet he still pushed on with his duties as
he attended any cadet that needed his help
or to look at their work, not allowing his
pain get in his way.
Vader once heard a few cadets whisper to one
another how Baylo was brave for still teaching
despite the pain he had in his back, a statement
that ticked the Sith Lord off, as the old
instructor knew nothing of real pain compared
to him.
Finally near the end of the teaching lesson,
a young cadet called over to have the Commandant
check on her calculations for the coordinates
for the planned hyperspace jump to Christophis.
Baylo came over and was initially impressed
with the calculations she had until he discovered
one small error, that he went on to change
himself.
After making the supposed correction in the
navigation computer, Baylo looked at Vader
and made the comment “They don’t learn
right away, but they do learn.
I get results.
You can tell your Emperor that”.
For the first time since stepping on the bridge,
Vader spoke, stating that Palpatine was his
Emperor as well.
Several cadets turned over to look at the
two men who were face to face of each other,
curious to see what was about to occur.
But instead of feeling intimidated, Baylo
stood his ground and went on to ask what Vader
even was to the Emperor.
To which the Sith Lord replied that he would
do well if he never found out.
Still unphased by Vader’s presence and comments,
Baylo went on to tell his cadets that he was
leaving to attend the meeting with the rest
of the Naval chiefs and that they ought to
finish up by going into hyperspace using the
calculations he put in earlier.
He then casually walked by Vader and left
the bridge.
As Commandant Baylo left, Vader looked over
toward the cadet sitting at the navigation
computer and told her to wait.
He then walked over and looked right at her,
sensing something was off about her emotions
following her confrontation with the Commandant.
He sensed that for some odd reason she knew
that her initial calculations were correct,
and that despite Baylo telling her otherwise,
she refused to argue with him out of fear
of being possibly removed from the class.
Vader asked her to check her calculations
again.
She did just that and found that what Baylo
put in was completely off and made no sense.
He then told her to put in her initial calculations
in before they embarked into hyperspace.
As the ship was traversing through hyperspace,
Vader met with Baylo right outside the office
that was being used for the meeting.
Baylo made a joke how he’s not used to waiting
outside his own office for this long, to which
Vader responded that it wasn’t his office
anymore.
Still not intimidated, Baylo replied with
“whatever you say”.
Shortly afterwards they were asked to enter
inside the office to meet with Emperor Palpatine.
As Baylo was seated, Palpatine explained to
him how his current training school on the
Defiance was going to be folded into the existing
training center on Corellia for more efficiency,
and that he’ll be put on the navigation
institute plantside.
As the explanation finished, Baylo responded
with a simple “No”.
Such a response surprised both Sith Lords
present in the room, to which Palpatine asked
the man to repeat himself.
Baylo did just that, stating that he will
not transfer his vessel over to the Emperor’s
new command.
He continued by saying that his ship was commissioned
by the Republic to be used to train cadets
in service of the Republic Navy only, and
that he did not find the new Empire as legitimate.
After his rant ended, Palpatine told him to
stop playing games, and was about to explain
how the senate voted for the Republic to be
made into the Empire before being cut off
by Baylo,
who stated that the senate dissolved its pact
with the people the very moment it allowed
for a tyrant to take over.
He continued by saying that he considered
the Empire to be a hostile power and couldn’t
fulfill its orders.
Baylo then reached into his coat pocket and
placed down a datapad, stating that it was
his resignation.
Palpatine simply looked at the datapad and
then at the Commandant, and he began to chuckle
at the little speech he had just heard.
Before Baylo could dismiss himself from the
meeting, Vader stepped toward him.
Baylo looked up and told him how he didn’t
care if he was about to kill him.
Vader replied with that was only because he
believed himself to be already dead.
Palpatine asked what he meant by that, to
which Vader explained how Baylo intentionally
plotted the cruiser they were in to launch
itself into a star by changing the calculations
of the navigation computer.
Vader then said how he had them changed back
to their correct state, preventing the collision.
Having heard his assassination plot be foiled,
Baylo sat back down and cursed under his breath.
Palpatine congratulated Vader on his efforts,
and then turned back on the Commandant, who
had clear hatred and anger in his eyes now.
Baylo then exploded into a rant, saying how
he watched Palpatine and his cronies corrupt
the Navy bit by bit during the Clone Wars.
Turning it from the shield that protected
the people, into an oppressive weapon that
now was used to destroy.
And how doing so was the biggest insult to
all the men and women who have died in the
Republic navy before Palpatine’s Empire
took and corrupted it.
Vader looked at his master, awaiting an angry
response back, but was instead surprised to
see Palpatine very amused.
Perhaps wanting to hear more of the man’s
anger, Palpatine asked how Baylo was willing
to sacrifice his own colleagues and students
that were aboard the cruiser had his assassination
plan been a success.
Baylo responded that he now viewed his colleagues
only as mere traitors trying to save their
posts, and that death was a far better fate
for his students than having them become apart
of an evil force in the galaxy.
Having heard enough of this, Vader force choked
the man, snapping his throat in a blink of
an eye and killing him instantly.
Palpatine’s smile quickly vanished as he
witnessed what his apprentice had done and
shouted out his name, telling him how he did
not give him the order to kill Baylo.
Vader stood still, not understanding why his
master would have wanted to keep such a man
alive.
Sensing his apprentice’s confusion, Palpatine
explained how he was going to keep the old
fool alive for his own pleasure, forcing Baylo
to watch as the Navy he once loved be transformed
into something he hated.
Melt down the ship he beloved into metal to
be used for caterfia trays.
And that at the end of it all, he perhaps
could have used such a man in his Navy.
Baylo was willing to kill his own students
for a cause afterwall, and Palpatine believed
he could have convinced the man to use that
fire for his own ambitions.
But now all that was gone because Vader killed
him.
Vader tried to defend himself by saying that
Baylo was a clear threat, and that his method
of just killing him was a far more efficient
means of doing things.
But Palpatine didn’t want to hear any of
it, instead saying that because he did not
command Vader to kill Baylo, that he should
not have done it.
And his apprentice’s reasons for doing so
did not matter.
Before this Master and Apprentice discussion
could continue, the office door opened by
a cadet with the message that they’ve arrived
at their destination and the Naval chiefs
of Christophis were awaiting their Emperor.
She looked over at her former Commandant,
confused as to how he died.
Palpatine quickly commented how Baylo had
a sudden death from his old age as he was
making his way out of the office.
But before he left, Palpatine gave the cadet
one more order: to rename the cruiser they
were on from the Defiance, to the Obedience.
It was a one last kick into the passed Commandant
and a not so subtle hint toward Vader to know
his place.
Also fun fact, the female cadet in the story
was actually Rae Sealone.
She would later became a self appointed Grand
Admiral about 2 decades later, following the
Battle of Endor.